--- Page 1 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
1 
ECE323 Lab – Voltage-Controlled Oscillator 
  
I.  Introduction 
In many systems, timing circuits are needed not only for synchronous digital design but also to control 
mixed-signal circuits and interface functions.   A few examples of clocked analog circuits include analog-
to-digital converters, digital- to-analog converters, switched -capacitor filters, and chopper -stabilized 
opamps.  A single IC may require several different clock frequencies for the analog and digital cells.  Since 
these clocks may not be related by simple integer ratios and created with dividers, voltage -controlled 
oscillators (VCO) are popular circuits to generate the required frequencies on chip.  In this lab, we will 
analyze, design, and characterize one example of a VCO topology. 
 
II.  Objectives 
The objectives of this laboratory are 
1. Calculate the VCO circuit component values to meet a design specification. 
2. Learn the KiCad PCB design flow including LTSpice simulation with a sequential capture 
and PCB layout plan. 
3. Use LTSpice to simulate your captured circuits and verify expected performance and capture 
schematic integrity. 
4. Use Kicad to layout the PCB, verify it meets the schematic, and export the fabrication files to 
a professional outside PCB fabricator. 
5. Develop a schematic and PCB test plan at both the subcircuit and overall circuit levels. 
6. Assemble and characterize the VCO PCB prototype for subcircuit performance and output 
frequency vs. voltage for the overall VCO. 
 
III.  Motivation 
In this semester’s lab projects, we will often consider analog and mixed-signal design techniques.   VCO’s 
and phase-locked loops (PLL’s) provide a great entry point into circuits that incorporate both analog and 
digital circuit techniques to create a high performance mixed-signal function. 
 
IV.  Prelab  
Consider the “roughly” conceptual circuit of Figure 1, where a capacitor is charged and discharged thru 
two switches using complementary clocks. 
 
C
ICharge
IDisCharge
CLK
CLK
VCAP
+
-
 
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual Charge/Discharge Circuit 
 

--- Page 2 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
2 
For the case of the charge and discharge currents being equal and the clock signal being 50/50 duty cycle, 
the capacitor waveform would be as shown in Figure 2.   
CLK
T
VCAP
Time  
 
Figure 2.  Conceptual Circuit Waveforms 
 
 
For first half cycle, the top current source will supply (or push) current to the cap and it will charge.  For 
the second half cycle, the lower current source will sink (or pull) current from the cap and it will discharge.  
The peak-to-peak amplitude of the capacitor transient voltage is then given by (1). 
 
 
(1) 
 
  
 
Consider an example embodiment of this idea in the circuit in Figure 3 and description below.   
 
(1) The devices MPCS and MNCS will have respective DC gate biasing (VBiasP and VBiasN from current 
mirroring configurations)  to give a known current flow ( I ) when operated in saturation.  
Complimentary MOS devices MPSW and MNSW are driven with a single logic signal VDisCharge 
with a digital value of either 0 volts (Lo) or VCC volts (Hi) to exclusively turn on either of the 
switches MPSW or MNSW. 
(2) Charge State (VDisCharge logic Lo):  When VDischarge is logic Lo (0V), the PMOS switch MPSW will 
be on (triode) and NMOS switch MNSW will be off  (cutoff).  Current source MPCS will be in 
saturation and have current flow ( I ) as long as this device remains in saturation.  Current source 
MNSW will have zero current and zero V DS since the NMOS switch is off.   So net result is that 
capacitor charges.   
(3) Discharge State (VDisCharge logic Hi):   When VDischarge is logic Hi (VCC), the NMOS switch MNSW 
will be on (triode) and PMOS switch MPSW will be off  (cutoff).  Current source MNCS will be 
in saturation and have current flow ( I ) as long as this device remains in saturation.  Current source 
MPSW will have zero current and zero V SD since the PMOS switch is off.   So net result is that 
capacitor discharges. 
2
T
C
IVCAP ⋅=∆

--- Page 3 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
3 
VC AP
VCC
VBiasP
VBiasN
VD isC harge
MPCS
MNCS
MNSW
MPSW
 
 
Figure 3.  CMOS embodiment of charge/discharge circuit 
 
 
Now review the VCO circuit of Figure 4 noting the following important functional cells: 
 
1. Voltage to current converter – you should recognize it from last semester.  It was used to set 
the laser current in your audio transmitter board. 
2. Current mirrors – we’ve discussed these in class and they establish the needed gate bias 
voltages and current sources to create our target charge/discharge currents. 
3. Two MOS devices used as switches as discussed above. 
4. Integrating Capacitor 
5. Voltage divider network to set reference levels for the comparators. 
6. Analog Comparators – we will discuss. 
7. RS-Latch from NAND gates.  (Latch has memory, see Appendix I) 
 
In this arrangement (and if properly designed), the capacitor is unable to attain a DC steady state 
condition.  Notice that the switches in the current steering network are being driven by the output of the 
latch such that current mirrors will be either pushing current to or pulling current from the capacitor based 
on the output ( FB ) logic state.  The capacitor voltage is monitored by a window comparator network 
formed by the analog comparators and the voltage divider and their results fed to an RS-latch.  An 
important architectural feature in this system is that the initial current reference for the current mirror 
steering network is developed from a voltage-to-current converter.  So the input voltage VCTRL sets the 
oscillation frequency, leading to the overall circuit name of voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO).   

--- Page 4 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
4 
Theoretical Investigations: 
 
1.  Assuming ideal analog comparators feeding the RS latch, zero delay NAND gates, all NMOS mirror 
devices identical, and all PMOS mirror devices identical, sketch the transient voltage waveform seen 
across the capacitor.  Label important values.  Find an expression for the output frequency with the circuit 
component values left as variables.   In your analysis refer to the two analog voltage divider reference 
levels simply as VHI and VLO. 
 
2.  One important issue with oscillators is whether or not they will start; does this design start from all 
initial conditions?  Explain why or why not.  
 
3.  What happens if the charge and discharge currents don’t match?  Show a sketch. 
 
4.  What other ways from a circuit component standpoint can the frequency be changed if the input 
voltage VCTRL is held constant? 
 
 
VCAPFB
VCTRL
VCC
RCTRL
R1
R2
R3
VCAP
+
+
+
-
-
-
FB
C
LM324
LM2901
LM2901
5LN01Sp
 
 
Figure 4.  Conceptual VCO Topology 
 

--- Page 5 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
5 
V.  Additional Circuits 
 
(A)  The full design will also include a voltage regulator to set the supply level VCC for the entire board 
from an input unipolar voltage supply of 10 Volts  (VPOWER).  The voltage regulator will be an LM317 
TO-220 package and we will use the typical design a suggested in the TI LM317 datasheet and shown 
below. 
 
Figure 5.  LM317 application taken from TI LM317 datasheet 
 
In our case, the regulated VCC voltage (VO) is to be approximately 5 Volts so R2 is to be calculated from 
the relationship in the datasheet.  CADJ is to be a 25uF electrolytic, CO a 10uF electrolytic, and Ci a 0.1uF 
ceramic. 
 
(B)  The full VCO PCB design shall also include an on-board PWM driven LED circuit for quick 
verification of PCB functionality. 
+
-
VPWM
VCAP
RLED
VCC
VCC
5mm 
LEDWiper
10k pot LM2901
 
 
Figure 6. PWM LED driver circuit 
2
2
1
1 50o REF
RV V AR
R
µ= ⋅+ + ⋅ 


--- Page 6 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
6 
(C)  The full VCO PCB design will also include a voltage divider on the input VCTRL voltage input line 
to establish an approximate 1V input when the external VCTRL voltage is not present.  The voltage 
divider should have equivalent resistance input resistance in the low kilo-ohms. 
 
(D)  Provide decoupling of IC’s and voltage dividers as discussed in the technical notes section. 
 
 
V.  Materials 
The materials for this project will include computer workstation for PCB design and simulation.  Your 
bench equipment, fabricated PCB, and provided circuit components for bench verificaiton.  Components:  
LM324, CD4007’s, 74AC00, LM2901 (comparators), 5LN01SP, LM317, capacitor, and resistors.  Other 
components needed for the overall circuit will be provided. 
 
VI.  Design Specification 
You are to design, simulate, build, and test a VCO prototype.  In this design, the power supply input is 10 
Volts (no negative supply!) which is regulated to 5 Volts to supply the entire VCO design, the capacitor 
value is 0.022uF, and the design should provide an output frequency of approximately 1KHz for an input 
control voltage of 1.0 Volt. 
 
VII.  Technical Notes 
1. The LM2901 is a quad comparator IC.  Review the device schematic in the datasheet paying 
attention to the output.  This is an open collector device.  You will need to use a pull-up 
resistor (suggest 10k) from the LM2901 output to VCC (5V) to make the comparator 
work.  Another issue with the comparator is input common mode voltage range which we 
will discuss in the coming weeks in class.   For the comparator to work properly the 
comparison voltages you select on the voltage divider should be no larger than 3 volts. 
2. The only discrete transistor is the 5LN01SP in the voltage to current converter (V2I). All 
other transistors are contained in the CD4007 chips. 
3. The CD4007 contains 3 PMOS and 3 NMOS devices that are “partially” isolated.  Your 
project includes the part CD4007 for your schematic capture, you are not to use discrete 
transistor symbols.  This IC has power and ground (which must be tied to power and 
ground) and you will need to figure out how to use 2 of these IC’s to design the current 
mirrors and current steering switches. Unused devices will have some floating terminals.  
Remember that good mirrors require process matching.  Verify the CD4007 symbol pinout 
with the datasheet.   
4. Your RS latch is created from the quad NAND IC 74AC00, see appendix for NAND Latch 
discussion. 
5. IC’s should include a 0.1uF decoupling cap between their power and ground pins.  You 
would like these to be near each IC.   Ask about this concept. 
 
VIII.  Milestones and Deadlines - Preliminary 
  
Milestone 1- (End of class Wednesday 2/5) - KiCad tool training and process flow with the LM317 
regulator circuit. Implementation of the LM317 voltage regulator circuit.  Theoretical design (R
2 
calc), schematic capture of the regulator block, LTSpice verification of intended regulator 
performance, PCB layout and verification, and documented work in a PowerPoint presentation. 
 
Milestone 2 - (Before class Monday 2/10) – Overall design of the VCO circuit.  Selection of the 
reference voltages for the window comparator divider and hence the divider resistor values.  
Calculation of the charge/discharge current for the specified capacitor value and 1kHz frequency 
spec.  Calculation of the V2I converter resistor value for the corresponding 1V VCTRL input at 

--- Page 7 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
7 
target frequency spec and integrator capacitor value .  Schematic capture plan for V2I and current 
mirror block (For Monday 2/10).  Schematic capture plan for window comparator block (For 
Wednesday 2/12). 
 
Milestone 3 – (End of Monday 2/10) – Schematic capture of the V2I and current mirror network, 
LTSpice verification, PCB layout and verification, and documented work appended to the 
PowerPoint presentation.    
 
Milestone 4 – (End of Wednesday 2/12) – Schematic capture of the window comparator and latch 
circuitry, LTSpice verification, PCB layout and verification, and documented work appended to 
the PowerPoint presentation.    
 
Milestone 5 – (End of Friday 2/14) – Schematic capture of additional system components and 
interconnect of the blocks , LTSpice verification, f inal PCB rou ting and verification, and 
documented work appended to the PowerPoint presentation.    
 
Milestone 6 – (End of Monday 2/17) – Schematic and PCB cleanup.  Export of final layout files 
to Gerber fabrication database.  Upload of Gerber files to JLCPCB.  Selection of fabrication options 
and screen capture of JLC estimate.  Final PowerPoint Update Due by NOON Tuesday 2/18/25. 
 
Milestone 7 – (Tuesday 2/18) – Submission of Gerber files to purchasing for submission of the 
JLCPCB order. 
 
Milestone 8 – (TBD, determined by receipt of PCBs) – Assemble PCBs and bench test.  Append 
bench test results to the PowerPoint document.   
 
 VCO Project Quiz  – Wednesday 2/19/25 (ish) 
 
IX.  Workspace   
Each student will work from a shared google drive created by the instructor.  Your working KiCad project 
folder will be located in this drive folder along with all simulation files, documentation, data files, etc.  
Files are not to reside on windows desktops or to local machine hard drives.  They are required to be in 
this protected space.  All simulation will use the Windows version of LTSpice and the text based Spice 
deck interface. 
 
X.  Summary 
Your lab effort documentation will be a regularly updated PowerPoint presentation including 
- Title Slide 
- Circuit Schematics (Visio) 
- Theoretical Information – How does it work? 
- Design Specification and Your Corresponding Design Values with calculations 
- Comparison of Experimental and Simulated Results   
o 2 slides of simulated sub-block performance verification (with Visio schematics) 
o 2 slides of measured sub-block performance verification (with Visio schematics) 
o 1 or 2 slides of waveforms, experimental and simulated VCO with 1V on the VCO 
control voltage. 
o 1 slide with plot of measured and simulated frequency vs. control voltage. 
o 1 slide with discussion of prototype inaccuracy contributors. 
- Sequential Circuit and Layout Screen shots from KiCad 
- Sequential Verification Simulations 
- Conclusions Slide 

--- Page 8 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
8 
Appendix I. RS  NAND Latch Operation 
 
 
Q2
Q1
A
B Z
A        B        Z
0        0        1
0        1        1
1        0        1
1        1        0
Note:   If A=0  or B=0 , Z=1
             If A=1, acts as inverter to B and vice versa
R
S
R        S       Q1       Q2
0        0        1          1          
0        1        1          0
1        0        0          1
1        1       Q1*    Q2*      
Not Allowed
NAND Gate
RS NAND Latch
Memory State
Memory Model R=1 and S=1
Q1
Q2
Positive Feedback!
Q1=1 and Q2=0 is a solution.
Q1=0 and Q2=1 is a solution.
Solution depends on last state, set or reset.
Emphasizes why we don’t typically want R=0 
S=0 state (we won’t know memory state, set 
by race condition).  
 
 
  

--- Page 9 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
9 
Appendix II.  KiCad Reduced Schematic Parts List 
 
1N4001 – Diode 
74HC00 Quad Nand 
C – Unpolarized capacitor  (All caps less than 1uF)  Set to standard size ceramics on hand   
CD4007UBE – CMOS transistor IC – 3PMOS, 3NMOS 14pin 
Conn_01x08 – 8 pin 1 row connector.  2 preplaced on the template schematic for board interfacing 
C_polarized_us – Polarized capacitor (caps greater than 1 uF) Set standard size electrolytics on hand 
LED – 5mm LED  
LM317_TO-220  -  LM317 in 3 terminal TO-220 Package 
LM324 – Quad opamp 14 pin 
LM2901 – Quad analog comparator 14pin 
Mountinghold – Preplaced in the template schematic 
pwr_flg  - Power port identifier for KiCad for schematic checks 
Q_NMOS_SDB  - Generic 3 pin transistor symbol to instantiate for the 5LN01SP 
R – Resistor symbol with package size set to standard 0.25W package 
R_potentiometer-US – 3 terminal POT sized selected POT from Digikey 
 
 
Appendix III.  KiCad PCB process flow for the ECE323 (After analysis, component calcs, initial 
connection maps, etc.) 
 
1. Capture sequential schematic block in KiCad 
2. Export text simulation netlist from KiCad 
3. LTSpice simulate the full sequential schematic step for correct operation 
4. Transfer capture to PCB layout (Update PCB from schematic) 
5. Position parts and perform routing 
6. Run Design Rules Check which will perform LVS (Layout vs. Schematic connections), 
clearance, and min/max feature limits. 
7. Upon full success, return to top and implement next sequential block.   
 

--- Page 10 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
10 
Appendix IV.  CD4007 Functional Drawing from TI and Custom KiCad Symbol 
 
 
 
 
     
Notes:  Pin 14 and 7 establish power and ground biasing of all the PMOS and NMOS bodies.  So these 
need to be tied to VCC and RTN.   
 
  


--- Page 11 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
11 
Appendix V.  KiCad Schematic Template 
 
Preplaced J1 connector with pins for interfacing of the VCO control voltage VCTRL, input power and 
ground VPOWER (10V) and RTN.  Preplaced J2 output interface connector with connection to circuit 
signals VFB, VCAP, VHI, VLO, and RTN for a convenient reference location. 
 
Preplaced power flags for 10V and RTN for Kicad circuit checks. 
 
3 Preplaced boxes for sequential schematic capture effort. 
 
4 Preplaced mounting holes. 
 
Preplaced Hierarchal port names for simulation subcircuit generation (Box labeled LTSpice Simulation 
Ports).  Format of created subcircuit file: 
.subcircuit Project_Name  
+ RTN  
+ VCAP  
+ VCC 
+ VCTRL 
+ VFB  
+ VHI  
+ VLO 
 
 


--- Page 12 ---
ECE323   Spring 2025 
    
12 
Appendix VI.  KiCad Layout Template 
 
1. Predefined board size 
2. 2 Preplaced 8 PIN interface connectors 
3. 4 Preplace mounting holes 
4. Rat lines for RTNs unconnected 
5. SilkScreen labels for connectors and VCO Board preplaced. 
6. Copper fill regions defined (not obviously seen in this view)  
 
 
 
 
 
